["Toreador song -
Aria of the hot spring manners" playing]
Aria of the hot spring manners" continues]
[music ends]
[birds chirping]
INARI BATHHOUSE
[gasping]
[man] Huh?
[grunts]
[gasping]
-[grandiose opera music]
-[male narrator] Rome, 128 CE.
The reign of former emperor
Marcus Ulpius Trajan
saw the empire expand
to its largest scale in history,
attaining the peak of prosperity.
The enthronement
of current emperor Hadrian
began an era of "Pax Romana,"
a term derived from the goddess
of peace and order, Pax.
During this prosperous age,
competition in the world of architecture
became fiercer and fiercer.
And in that world,
one thing deserves special note,
namely… thermae.
These bathhouses were open to everyone,
from slaves to the emperor,
to enjoy.
The people of Rome came to desire
newer and more novel thermae
and architects of great wisdom
competed to produce them.
This story
follows the life of an architect
who specialized in bathhouse design
and whose unique experiences
drove the development of the thermae
and ancient Rome.
[Lucius] What on earth do you mean
my design is unusable?
Hmm. Tell you what, Lucius,
I'll get right to the point.
The truth is,
your ideas are just too outdated.
What?
Get with the times.
Don't you know bath designs like this
were in fashion 100 years ago?
What? Well, of course I do, that's why
I elected to go against the grain.
Rome is booming with wealth
and the people are merrier than ever.
Surely what they yearn for most
is a taste of the good old days,
that which modern Rome
has forgotten all about!
Yes, well, perhaps that makes sense
from your perspective
but would the general population
share that sentiment?
[grunts]
-[man] Take a look.
-Hmm?
[man] Ever since Hadrian took the throne,
we've seen architecture with fresh
new designs pop up all over the place.
After all,
the emperor himself is the one
who reconstructed the Acropolis of Greece.
If you insist on wasting time
on these designs
instead of getting with the program,
we'll surely go bankrupt.
What… how dare you, sir!
I have journeyed as far as Athens
to study under the best architects
this world has to offer
and yet you stand there
mocking my designs?
How dare you insult my artistry!
I didn't say all that.
But as things are, I'm just not able to
use your designs with what I'm working on.
-[grunts]
-[dramatic piano music]
[Lucius] You are going to regret this!
Don't come crawling back to me later!
[scoffing]
Who does that bastard think he is?
He wouldn't recognize a good idea
even if it hit him square in the face!
[Lucius] There's no denying the fact
that Rome has never been
as prosperous as it is now.
No matter where you look,
this town is full of insula high-rises
which reach toward the heavens themselves.
Even people of all walks of life
come and go as they wish.
I know
the Roman empire's borders have grown
but exactly how far do they reach?
Come, my love. Finish this up and join me.
Our bed awaits.
Livia, this is important work.
Go to bed without me.
[Livia scoffs]
I neglected my wife
to stay up all night finishing this design
and it turned out to be total garbage.
So that's how it is.
[Marcus] Hey chef, may I have one, please?
[man] Here you are.
[chuckles] It looks tasty. Bon appetit.
Oh, that's…
-Hey, Lucius.
-Hm?
-Oh, Marcus.
-What's with that gloomy expression?
I'm just a bit lost in thought.
[chuckles] Had another fight
with the missus, did you?
Actually, I recently landed myself
into unemployment.
That's rough, buddy.
Why don't you just find
another agency to work for?
No. Though it pains me to say,
I think my time in this industry is over,
Marcus.
Oh, come now, old friend, don't give up.
I'm sure someone out there will take you.
I know what you need. At times like these,
we gotta wash our cares away
in a nice bath.
What do you say?
-[Marcus] Yahoo! We're here.
-[gentle percussive music]
[Lucius] There are more
than 1000 bathhouses in this city alone.
I'm fully aware
that Romans love their baths
but if you don't build something
truly unique, it won't get people talking.
They won't give it a second chance.
Well, don't just stand there, Lucius.
-Let's head on in.
-Yeah.
[man 1] The guy who runs the grilled
chicken stand just had his third kid.
[man 2] Oh, really?
[gentle music]
All right, see you in there.
Oh, Lucius. Don't forget
to have someone watch our clothes.
Of course. For you.
-[straining]
-Make sure to work up a sweat.
Your hair has grown quite a bit, sir.
[giggling]
[Lucius] Every time I come here,
it's always so rowdy.
-[laughing]
-[man] Shaving, anyone?
Hair removal of any kind.
Yeah, over here.
-Anyone want a shave?
-I can really go for a clean shave.
[man] Coming.
[Lucius] Roman bathhouses
are the epitome of perfect.
For example the way this one is made
so that the steam clings to the ceiling
and falls back into the bath as droplets.
The designer's passion for bathhouses
is seen in every inch of the place.
Start out in the tepidarium,
transition to the caldarium, [sighs]
and then rest in the frigidarium
to cool off.
I simply can't imagine
anything more wonderful.
But if people are already used to bathing
in a place like this,
what kind of bathhouse would make them
consider trying something different?
[Lucius]
There has to be a good idea somewhere.
No good, nothing comes to mind at all.
Rome has grown so much.
If there was just one place in the empire
where bathing was as important
to the culture as it is in Rome,
I just know it could help me
come up with something special.
-[mysterious music]
-Hmm?
What kind of drainage method is this?
Let's take a closer look
at how this is designed.
[groaning]
Gods, I'm being sucked down the drain!
[groans in pain]
[suspenseful music]
[groaning]
[shouting]
[screaming]
-[dramatic music]
-[gasping]
[gasping]
Huh?
[Lucius] Where in the world am I?
This place, it's completely foreign to me.
[gentle percussive music]
[groans]
That's Mount Vesuvius in Pompeii.
My word, what a lovely painting.
[old man] Hey there, Mr. Foreigner.
You must have been soaking down
at the bottom of the bath
for quite some time, weren't you?
[Lucius] Such a flat face,
this man is no Roman!
Oh dear, I see.
Seems like he doesn't understand me.
When did he get here?
Ahhh…
Huh?
[Lucius] This room must be where
the slaves come to take their baths.
So that being the case,
it's only right to assume
the hot water that's sucked down
by that drainage system
is what these flat-faced slaves bathe in.
I see.
[old man] Excuse me, Mr. Foreigner.
Don't you think it's time
for you to get out?
You don't want to get dizzy
and faint in the water, do you?
Yeah. Go outside.
Outside. See?
[Lucius] I take it I'm not welcome here.
He's likely saying,
"This bath isn't for Romans,
so please get out."
Well, I can't deny that he has a point.
This is the only place slaves can relieve
the stress from their duties after all.
But I must say,
they possess some quite
advanced looking technology down here.
This object is made of materials
I've never seen in my life.
And the shade of yellow
on this epicurean anomaly is beautiful.
[sniffing]
Hey there, buddy, it's your first time
seeing a Japanese bath, ain't it?
If you want to take one of the buckets
as a souvenir, go ahead.
I'll even ask for you.
What could this man be saying to me
with such a silly grin on his face?
So even a citizen of the world famous Rome
doesn't understand
how to make a bucket like this, huh?
I imagine he's mocking my curiosity.
The owner and I go way back,
so I'm sure I can swing something.
It should be alright
as long as it's just one,
so come on, let's go ask him.
Hmm? [gasps]
[dramatic piano music]
-[man] Hello there.
-[woman] Ah, come on in.
You're lively as always.
[man] This heat is driving me crazy.
-Hey.
-Well, well, done already, huh?
[gasps] What?
[groaning]
[Lucius] This pane of glass is massive
beyond compare.
What an advanced civilization!
And there,
they even have a bulletin board.
Imagine mere slaves
capable of such skillful craftsmanship.
Is this receptacle here
for storing your clothes?
We could easily recreate this design
with our own technology.
And what is this contraption?
It's creating wind from nothing.
How on earth is that possible?
What a shocking group of slaves
I've stumbled upon.
Their baths are just the inspiration
I was looking for.
Now all I have to do
is put these ideas into practice
and I'll be able to satisfy
the deep desires of Roman citizens
who yearn for novelty!
[man] What's wrong, buddy?
You didn't actually forget
where you put your clothes, did you?
[in foreign language]
Can I bring my friend?
Sorry pal but I have no idea
where your clothes ran off to.
Hey, Ma, looks like
our new foreigner friend here
managed to misplace his clothes.
-You've seen them anywhere?
-Sure haven't.
Hmm?
[Lucius] All I asked was if
I could bring a friend here with me
to see their amenities
and yet they panicked, so…
Is it possible that
they don't want a Roman like myself
imitating their bathhouse?
Sounds like a real problem, huh?
Just took over reception from my dad,
haven't the slightest clue
where they could be.
And the old man just went off
to play Pachinko too.
How unlucky. Huh?
[in Roman]
I understand that these flat-faced people
cherish their bathing culture.
But now that they're part
of the Roman Empire,
they must understand that the Romans
have the right to take in their culture.
[man] Huh?
[woman] Hey! You can't go out there
without any clothes on!
Buddy! Hey, buddy!
I'll go outside and check for you,
just stay put.
[Lucius] Cry all you want, slaves,
you can't stop me.
It's imperative that I show this place
to Marcus immediately.
I'll jump on this before anyone else
has the opportunity.
And once I've constructed
the finest thermae around,
that pompous bastard at my previous agency
will rue the day he fired me!
Curtains for blocking the sun
at the entrance?
Yet another idea for me to appropriate.
As they say,
I'll strike while the iron is hot!
-Oh my, looky there.
-Oh dear. [giggles]
-[Lucius gasps]
-Mister.
I'm telling you this for your own good,
you gotta get inside.
-[chokes, coughs]
-You alright?
That noxious scent in the air
is unlike anything I've smelled before.
So many things have assaulted my senses
since I arrived here.
Was Rome somehow conquered in an instant?
Of course not, that's highly unlikely.
But if not, something peculiar
has happened to me.
[man] I'm beginning to think his clothes
ain't the only things he's lost.
Maybe so.
He looks sadder than a dog in rain.
Poor little guy.
[Lucius] What happened to me?
I feel as though I've come down
with an illness.
[man] Buddy. Hey, buddy.
Here.
Enjoy. Have a drink on me.
It's Japanese tradition
that if you come to a bathhouse,
you gotta have one of these.
Hmm.
FRUIT MILK
Oh yeah, that hits the spot.
He had some himself,
so I doubt he's trying to poison me.
Oh, sorry about that.
Guess I forgot to take off the lid.
One sec.
There.
One swig of that
and you'll be back on your feet.
[Lucius] I see.
For now, I should focus
on quenching my thirst.
[gasps] Delicious!
It's chilled and sweet
as if it were nectar from the gods!
The flavor is almost like sweet
fruit syrup that's been mixed with milk
and they're floating
down the back of my mouth.
This magnificent refreshment
couldn't possibly be of this world!
Drink up, we've got plenty more of them.
[chuckles]
Ah… What overwhelming sweetness!
If I'm dreaming, please don't wake me up!
Ahhh…
That ought to get you feeling
right as rain before you know it.
-[laughs]
-[Marcus in distance] Lucius!
Lucius! Hey, Lucius!
Are you okay?
Oh, man. You were at the bottom so long,
I thought you drowned down there.
What the?
What happened to those slaves
with the flat faces?
What are you saying?
Drink some water and come to your senses.
[Lucius] Oh, man. So I was dreaming.
-[glass clanks]
-Hmm?
[gasps]
FRUIT MILK
[uplifting music]
A WHILE LATER
So I disrobe here
and place my toga in this basket?
Indeed, and the slave up there keeps watch
for any would be thieves.
What a relief, huh?
[man 1] Oh, here are the notices
for this week's performances.
[man 2] My, my, how tasteful.
[man 3] Well, you can't have
Mount Vesuvius without the Gulf of Napoli,
and you can't have the gulf
without that famous pine tree.
[man 4] Hey, no cutting in line.
[man 5]
Say what? I was the first one here.
Our special drink today is milk
with fruit juice.
Supplies are limited, so one per person.
Ah! Damn!
Gotta say, I'm impressed
by all your sudden success.
You went from jobless and depressed
to the talk of the town, huh?
What happened in that bath?
[Lucius]
Sorry to leave you in the dark, Marcus,
but I don't think I could
explain that to you even if I tried.
And besides, there's still something
that isn't sitting right with me.
[man] Master Lucius…
unless we procure an additional cow,
there's no way we can keep up
with the vast demand for milk.
Understood. I'll try to find one.
Man,
that picture is really something else.
[Lucius]
Yes, it's crafted even more masterfully
than the one in the other world.
However,
this bottle I brought back from there,
its shape is so smooth and uniform,
it gives me chills.
In comparison,
the ones made by
the finest of our top craftsmen
sadly don't even hold a candle to it.
Ahh… But you know,
the heat outside and in here
is starting to get out of control
and this would be perfect
if it were a bit cooler.
I know, that's why we chose to chill them
in water underground.
We also decided to seal each bottle
with two sheets of papyrus
in order to prevent any spilling mishaps
during transport but alas.
Oh, my finger slipped in.
[grunts] And I was only able
to get the top piece off.
Back in the other world,
that man used a small tool of some kind.
"Pop". Such a satisfying sound
once he lifted the lid.
The flat faces were truly incredible.
It's quite obvious that
there's much I can still learn from them
if only I could get back there.
That "pop," so satisfying.
Oh yeah, Lucius,
apparently someone found this big hole
in the bath you almost drowned in.
And it was so bad,
they're gonna demolish it.
What'd you say?
Huh? You okay?
This won't do. Before it's gone,
I must see that "pop" with my own eyes
at least one more time!
[Marcus] Hey! Where are you going?
Lucius. Lucius!
Lucius!
[Kenjiro Tsuda] Thermae Romae.
The Hot Spring Tour.
[grandiose opera music]
In search for new inspiration,
author Ms. Mari Yamazaki
embarked on a journey
to rediscover Japan's bathing culture.
-Nice to meet you.
-Likewise.
Do you know how long this
hot spring has been flowing here?
I'm guessing it's been a very long time.
-It's before the Roman Empire.
-Before the Roman Empire?
The water flows from bedrock
that is 5000 years old.
-5000 years ago?
-Yes.
-From the dawn of civilization.
What is this, to begin with?
There are seven water troughs there.
This is a natural hot spring,
but it's about 52 degrees Celsius.
-[Mari] 52 degrees?
-It's too hot to go in.
By letting it flow through those troughs,
the air lowers the temperature
of the water.
-[Mari] I see.
-Then it's circulated to various pools.
That's how it's done.
This hot spring
is supplied by the snow
that has melted at Mount Shirane.
How long do you think that takes?
Well, it travels through the bedrock
as it's filtered…
-How long is it?
-The water here is from 30 years ago.
-30 years ago?
-Yes.
It's similar to how stars are
tens of thousands of light years away.
-Indeed.
-What was I doing 30 years ago?
I was a poor student in Italy.
-This water is from that time?
-Yes.
This is created solely by using the energy
generated on earth.
Yes, it's all natural.
[Kenjiro Tsuda]
Hot springs are one of Earth's blessings.
We visited a natural hot spring
where we can experience that.
KUSATSU ONSEN SAINOKAWARA PARK
-[Mari] Sainokawara hot spring?
-Yes.
-This is another hot spring?
This may look like a lake,
but it's a hot spring.
-A hot spring lake?
-Yes.
Everything is a hot spring.
Please touch it.
It's so warm.
-It feels good, right?
-Yes.
This is wonderful.
[man]
Kusatsu has over 100 natural hot springs.
-100?
-Yes.
[man] You saw the Yubatake hot spring,
and the Sainokawara hot spring.
The other famous spot is
Shirahata hot spring.
The water coats your skin.
There's also a place called
Bandai hot spring.
It's the largest hot spring in Kusatsu.
-Out of the 100 locations, right?
-Yes.
It's a well-known spot.
It's amazing.
All of these are hot springs.
I want to sit right there
and meditate under the water.
-[shamisen music]
-[Kenjiro Tsuda] Thermae memory.
Ms. Yamazaki sketched
a memorable moment from this trip.
[Mari] I drew a scene
where Lucius is deep in thought
while staring at the hot spring waterfall.
I've seen many natural hot springs
all over the world,
but this one is very Japanese.
It really matches
the cultural climate of Japan.
I think that's Kusatsu's charm.
[Kenjiro Tsuda]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Ms. Yamazaki's journey will continue
as she searches for more hot springs.
[gentle traditional Japanese music]